---
layout: post
title: What Losing My Luggage in Nepal Taught Me About Decision Making
categories: [blog]
tags: [lesson]
status: publish
type: post
published: true

---

You know that feeling you get when you're in a Nepalese airport and realize
that all your luggage is gone?

If so, my sincere condolences. Otherwise, let me fill you in.

The date was December 4, 2015. I was leaving Kathmandu airport with only
the clothes on my back. A couple days later, I would start the Annapurna
circuit with my friend and we would trek 200km over two weeks across the
Himalaya areas of Nepal.

I flew to Nepal from China where I went to visit friends and family. When
I left China, I did so through the Beijing Capital International Airport
with a 65L Osprey backpack filled to the brim with new REI trekking
equipment.

I didn't know this at the time, but my 9:15 flight out of the country had been
changed and I was now supposed to be boarding a flight 1h earlier. The airline
had sent me a notification email but the great firewall of China blocked gmail
and I was blissfully unaware until I was at the China Eastern Airline counter
and the clerk told me that she couldn't find my name in the system for my
original flight. My new flight left at 8:30AM but ticketing closed 40min before
departure and the time was now 8:04AM. I would not be able to get on this
rescheduled flight.

After much back and forth with the airline, I was able to book my original
flight at 9:15AM. My flight to Kathmandu had a layover in Kunming China.
Since I now had "changed" the first leg of my flight, the airline clerk
explained that I would need to retrieved my checked bag at Kunming and
check it in again to my final decision.

This wasn't a problem in in theory since I had a 2h layover in Kunming. In
practice, the flight landed late and I only had 50minutes. I knew that
I would not be able to get my ticket if I waited for my luggage (airline
locked tickets at 40minutes before departure) so I made the decision to
run to the arrival gate, foregoing my luggage. I reached the counter
exactly 40minutes before departure and the airline clerk grumpily printed
my ticket. He told me the plane would finish boarding in 10 minutes and
that if I got on the flight, I would not be able to retrieve my luggage.
I asked the clerk if there was a later flight but was told the next flight
would be leaving three days later. My choices were to leave now and have the airline
ship my luggage on Monday or stay in Kunming for three days and leave
Monday. I choose the former.

And so I arrived in Kathmandu feeling naked as I looked around at the
people with carts of luggage and big backpacks. I met up with my friend
who was already checked in to our hostel a block from Thamel, the tourist
part of the city and explained the situation. While waiting for my bag to
come, we used the opportunity to walk around Kathmandu as well as take
a day trip to Nagarkot (city to the east of Kathmandu known for its
beautiful sunrise view of the Himalaya) on the roof of an overcrowded bus.

While we were traveling, I told my friend that I had already mentally
accepted my pack as lost. In fact, I made a list of all the things I would
need if/when my luggage didn't arrive. I also mentally kicked myself for
not only losing a bag with brand new trekking equipment but also for
leaving ~$600 USD in the bag. All in all, it was around $1500 of money and
equipment.

On the days leading up to the date when the luggage was supposed to arrive, my
friend took every opportunity to remind me that it probably wouldn't come.
While I was the one who originally told him that I didn't expect to see my
luggage, the constant reminder struck a nerve and led to our first dispute
(of the trip).

I told my friend to back off. That his constant bringing up of the issue
wasn't helping things. To this argument, my friend replied replied with
his own laundry list of complaints. He was upset as well. The *stunt* with
my luggage was costing us valuable trekking time when we were already
under a tight timeline to begin with. My friend also critisized my
decision making. That I shouldn't have left my bag behind like that. He
said that he wasn't suprised that something like this happened.

We proceeded to walk in silence for some time, processing what the other
had just said. The criticism about my decision making struck another nerve
- this was something that I was keenly aware of and had been working had
to change.

It's true that at one point in my life, I developed a (well earned)
reputation for not thinking things through. I made impulsive decisions,
climbed buildings and went on impromptu trips with little forethought. One
example is a 200 mile bike ride from Houston to Austin over a long weekend
in college. The trip was made with the same friend that I was currently in
Nepal with. We made the trip without food or water and only one road bike
between the two of us (and one regular bike) which we took turns riding.
We brought one bike pump but never bothered to check if the pump valve
matched the bikes (it didn't). We didn't know where we would stay the
first night and ended up in the middle of nowhere lying in the back of
someone's suburban. We didn't realize how painful it would be to ride
a bike 200 miles over bad roads and no bike shorts and I had trouble
sitting for the week afterwards. It was a miracle that we made it out of
Houston.

I used to justify my behavior by claiming to be a big picture sort of
person. I didn't want to be caught in the details. As I mention in a [previous blog
entry](http://kevinslin.com/blog/2013/12/10/noticing-the-trees-among-the-forest.html),
details are decoys to a meaningful life. I believed that as long as I had
the right goals, I would be able to work out the details along the way.

A wise man is someone who is able to change their believes given new
evidence - while I can't claim to be wise, I did change my mind about
details. My major focus for the past two years has been to do a better job
focusing on the details. But as this luggage situation showed, I was still
not there.

I could argue that this wasn't my fault. The great firewall blocked the
notification that my flight was rescheduled. The flight that I ended up on
was 2h late. There were no other flights going to Kathmandu for three
days. But I knew I wasn't being honest with myself. I've flown enough to
know that almost all my flights get rescheduled. I could have booked
tickets from China using a different email account. I shouldn't have kept
money in a checked in bag. I should have not even checked in my bag in the
first place.

So instead of arguing, I conceded the point to my friend and we settled
our dispute. We arrived to the airport and just like I expected, my bag
never showed up.

I ended up getting all my stuff from Pasang's trekking shop in Thamel
Kathmandu because I liked the shop owner and because I bargained for
a discount in exchange for buying all my gear from him. One consolation
is that trekking equipment costs a tiny fraction of what it does in
America, and I got everything, pack, sleeping bag, shoes, clothing, etc
for under $200.

As  for the actual trek, we managed to complete it within two weeks as
well as have time for a 3 day side trip Tilicho lake (claimed by Nepal to
be both the highest and biggest lake but at 4919m and 4.8 square km, it is
neither). Every day was eat, trek, eat, trek, eat, sit by fire and sleep.
The simplicity of our daily lives was refreshing and allowed us to bring
some clarity in other aspects of our lives.

For me, I used part of the trek to better my decision making process. For
years now, I've been keeping a journal of all the mistakes that I've made.
I've drawn many lessons from these journals and used the trek to distil
these learnings into a checklist I could use for future decisions. I came
up with the following.

- Is it important? Am I making decisions based on my values and what matters to me?
- Emotional bias? Do I have polarizing feelings that are clouding my judgement?
- Sunk cost bias? Am I too invested in my methods?
- Assumptions? What are the fundamentals and are they valid?

- Analyze/Plan/Evaluate(APE). Get details on current state of world. Plan out the next move. Evaluate pros/cons of each move.
- Prepare. What actions can I do ahead of time?
- Contigency. Do theyexist? Especially for worst case scenario.
- Context. First principles. What is supposed to happen in this situation?

- Salvage. If a move doesn't go your way, is there still something positive you can get out of it?
- Improve. If a move does go your way, is there anything in addition that you can get?
- Loose threads. Is there something that doesn't make sense?

I  have yet to come up with a simple mnemonic for this checklist but have
used it enough in the past month to know that it works well (for me). My
general philosophy is that while it's okay to make mistakes, I will not
make the same mistake twice.

As a  bonus, when we came back to Kathmandu, I received notice that my
luggage arrived. The bad news is that inside my pack was a bag of fruit my
cousin had gifted me in Beijing before I left. After two weeks of sitting
around and being squeezed by other pieces of luggage , it had gone bad and
juices oozed from the once fruit-like-lumps onto the other articles inside
my pack. I was afraid that the airline would book me for unleashing some
chemical toxin. Luckily this has not happened and instead I've been able
to take some valuable lessons from the experience. My hope is that this
proves useful to people reading this but if you can only take away one
lesson, remember this - never carry fruit in your checked in luggage
(better yet, don't check in luggage).
